My dissertation presents a new framework for evaluating players in the National Football League, the most profitable sport in the world and the most watched sport in the United States.25 In particular, I focus on the performance of Wide Receivers - players responsible for catching passes to score points - using advanced tracking data from the 2022 NFL season.19
My model development consists of two parts, where in part one (section four of this dissertation) I use tracking data metrics to develop my own Wide Receiver rating system. First, using the position of the Wide Receiver and the defenders on the field at the time of a catch, I introduce and calculate an “openness” score, which measures a receiver’s ability to catch a pass under pressure from defenders. I also consider other key metrics like total catches the receiver made throughout the season, and the distance the ball traveled before it was caught on each individual pass. Then, I use a random forest28 to determine the importance of each of these features, and use these weights to develop my Wide Receiver rating system.
Then in part two (section 5 of this dissertation) I use my rating system to determine how likely a receiver is to make a given catch. I do this by applying machine learning techniques, including Random Forest, Logistic Regression27, and K-Nearest Neighbors.29 My models use the input features total catches the Wide Receiver made that season, distance of the pass, and my rating determined in part one to predict if a wide receiver is likely to catch a given pass. My results show that Random Forest outperforms my other models in accuracy and precision, achieving a predictive accuracy of 91.6%. My model also outperforms those which do not use advanced tracking metrics such as Joash Fernandes, Craig et al who were able to attain a highest predictive accuracy of 75.3%.11 These results emphasize the value of integrating tracking data into player evaluations. My approach lays the groundwork for improving wide receiver ratings and catch predictability, and exploring future enhancements, such as incorporating quarterback performance and additional game and player context.
